---
title: "Single-channel EOG sleep staging on a heterogeneous cohort of subjects with sleep disorders"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-05-15
date: 2024-05-15
venue: 'Physiological Measurement'
paperurl: 
citation: 
---
Hans van Gorp, Merel M van Gilst, Sebastiaan Overeem, Sylvie Dujardin, Angelique Pijpers, Bregje van Wetten, Pedro Fonseca and Ruud J G van Sloun, “Single-channel EOG sleep staging on a heterogeneous cohort of subjects with sleep disorders,” Physiological Measurement, May 2024.
\[[link](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6579/ad4251)\]
\[[pdf](http://hansvangorp.github.io/files/2024-05-15.pdf)\]

### Objective
Sleep staging based on full polysomnography is the gold standard in the diagnosis of many sleep disorders. It is however costly, complex, and obtrusive due to the use of multiple electrodes. Automatic sleep staging based on single-channel electro-oculography (EOG) is a promising alternative, requiring fewer electrodes which could be self-applied below the hairline. EOG sleep staging algorithms are however yet to be validated in clinical populations with sleep disorders.

### Approach
We utilized the SOMNIA dataset, comprising 774 recordings from subjects with various sleep disorders, including insomnia, sleep-disordered breathing, hypersomnolence, circadian rhythm disorders, parasomnias, and movement disorders. The recordings were divided into train (574), validation (100), and test (100) groups. We trained a neural network that integrated transformers within a U-Net backbone. This design facilitated learning of arbitrary-distance temporal relationships within and between the EOG and hypnogram.

### Main results
For 5-class sleep staging, we achieved median accuracies of 85.0\% and 85.2\% and Cohen’s kappas of 0.781 and 0.796 for left and right EOG, respectively. The performance using the right EOG was significantly better than using the left EOG, possibly because in the recommended AASM setup, this electrode is located closer to the scalp. The proposed model is robust to the presence of a variety of sleep disorders, displaying no significant difference in performance for subjects with a certain sleep disorder compared to those without.

### Significance
The results show that accurate sleep staging using single-channel EOG can be done reliably for subjects with a variety of sleep disorders.