---
title: "Model-Based Diffusion for Mitigating Automotive Radar Interference"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-04-14
date: 2024-04-14
venue: 'ICASSP'
paperurl: 
citation: 
---

Jeroen Overdevest, Xinyi Wei, Hans van Gorp, and Ruud J G van Sloun, "Model-Based Diffusion for Mitigating Automotive Radar Interference,"  in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Workshops (ICASSP). IEEE, 2024.
\[[link](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10626218)\]
\[[pdf](http://hansvangorp.github.io/files/2024-04-14.pdf)\]

Mitigating automotive radar-to-radar interference is a challenging task, especially when the observed signal is densely corrupted with highly correlated interference signals. In this paper, we propose to remove this interference using joint-conditional posterior sampling with score-based diffusion models. These models use three individual scores: a target score, an interference score, and a joint data consistency score. Leveraging the sparsity of clean target signals in the Fourier domain, we propose a model-based score estimator for the target signals, derived from the proximal step of the ℓ1 -norm. For the interference score, we use a neural network with denoising score-matching, given that it is difficult to obtain analytical statistical models of the interference signals. Lastly, the target and interference scores are connected by a data-consistency score. Experimental results show that our solution results in superior performance over state-of-the-art methods, in terms of normalized mean squared error (NMSE) and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves.